[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Internalized body cells
must adjust their genetics
and behaviors to
accommodate external,
outer world environments.
How do our bodies respond to the
environment in our outer world?
I'm your host, Bruce Lipton, for
this series on inner evolution.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Amoebas and other
single-celled organisms
live independently
in and directly
respond to the conditions in
their outer world environment.
However, cells in an
animal, such as a human,
live within a separate
internal environment.
The human skin, the
functional equivalent
of the cell membrane,
is the source
of the nervous system that links
the inner cellular environment
with the outer world.
The nervous system reads
the environmental signals,
while the mind interprets
these signals and sends
regulatory
information internally
to control the genetics
and behavior of our cells
and organs.
The mind has two interdependent
elements, the conscious
and the subconscious minds.
The conscious mind is connected
to your personal identity,
your spirituality.
This mind is a creative mind.
The subconscious
mind is a database
of stored behavioral programs.
This session will describe
the functional differences
between these two minds and how
they learn in different ways.
Let's start with how the
fate of a cell is determined.
As been described in
previous episodes,
my studies on stem
cells and tissue culture
revealed a very important
fact, that the fate
of these cells in
the culture dish
was actually dependent on
the chemistry of the culture
medium.
Well, the significance of
this is that culture medium
is the equivalent of blood.
Well, how does this relate
to the cells in our own body?
Well, first understand
this very important fact.
A human is not a
single organism.
A human body is a
skin-covered culture dish
with 50 trillion cells, and the
original culture medium, blood,
contains information.
And it's the composition
of this blood
that actually will determine
the fate of the cells.
Well, there are two
important components in blood
that we must consider.
Number one, blood
provides nutrition.
When I'm in the laboratory,
I use the best ingredients
possible to manifest
culture medium
for a very simple reason.
If I compromise on
the ingredients,
the cells actually suffer.
If I feed them culture medium
with less than the best culture
ingredients, the cells
actually begin to get sick,
and they will die.
Well, this is relevant
to us as well,
because, since we are creating
culture medium, blood,
we want to make the best culture
medium possible, which then
means we should really just
eat organic, natural foods,
because industrial
farm foods are
filled with toxic elements
that will negatively
affect the cells.
So a diet of wholesome food is
important in creating the best
culture medium for ourselves.
But in addition to
nutrition, culture medium
can change information.
And this information includes
hormones, growth factors,
emotional chemicals.
And so we should recognize
that a human body
is adjusting and responding to
the environment at all times.
So there are actually
an external environment
that has to be understood as
well as an internal environment
within the body.
Well, who reads
these environments?
And the answer is
the nervous system.
The brain represents
perception of the environment.
And as the brain
reads the environment,
it can release neurochemicals,
hormones, emotional chemicals
into the body that
will control the fate
to organize it to be in
harmony with whatever
the conditions of
the environment are.
So a very important
result is that the brain
is interpreting the
environment, and that's
what controls our cells.
So simply, environmental
signals are
what are responsible
for controlling
the fate of our biology.
Well, when we talk about animals
in general, this holds true.
But as we get into
higher organisms
in the evolutionary
tree, guess what?
There is a new,
additional device
that is interpreting the
environmental signals,
and that is the mind.
The mind is an interpretation
of what the brain perceives.
And the significance of
that is, well, each of us
have different minds.
Each of us can look at the world
and respond a different way
to the same environment.
So in looking at the sequence
of flow of information,
environmental signals are picked
up by the brain as perception.
The mind does an interpretation
of these environmental signals
and then releases chemistry,
such as hormones, growth
factors, emotional
chemicals, that
will coordinate our body to
conform to the environment
that we perceive.
And so it's actually
belief which
is the representation of
the mind's perceptions
that control our biology.
Our thoughts release
neurochemicals,
and these agents
control our biology.
To give you a simple
example of how this works,
I'd like to use a
cartoon of the brain.
And in this cartoon,
what you see
is the brain is holding a
flask of culture medium, which
is actually blood, and
it's feeding the cells
in our skin-covered dish with
this blood culture medium.
If the mind is perceiving
love, then the interpretation
of that environment
representing love
causes the brain to release
chemistry that actually
complements that perception.
So the brain releases some
very important chemistry
into the blood to
control our biology.
Included in this chemistry
is dopamine, a hormone
that gives us pleasure.
In addition, the brain releases
a hormone called oxytocin.
This hormone actually
causes us to bind
with the source of that love.
So this allows parents
and children to bond
together because of that love.
In addition, when
you're in love,
the brain also
releases vasopressin.
This is another
hormone that actually
causes us to be more
attractive to our partner.
In turn, this keeps the
love lasting a lot longer.
And lastly, when you're
in love, the brain
releases growth hormone.
And growth hormone, as the name
implies, enhances our vitality.
So very simply, the cocktail
of chemicals released
by the brain when
we're experiencing love
is released into the blood,
the culture medium that
influences our cells.
The result is this.
When people fall in
love, they're healthier.
They glow.
People can even say, "Look.
Look at these people.
You can see how
they're in love by just
looking at their physiology."
Love enhances our
growth and our vitality.
However, if you
open up your eyes,
and you see something that
scares you in the environment,
well, that experience of fear
causes a completely different
set of chemicals to be released
by the brain, and as a result,
changes the behavior profoundly,
because the blood is now
containing information other
than information about love.
So for example,
when you're in fear,
you release stress hormones such
as cortisol, norepinephrine.
These hormones actually change
the circulation of the body
and put us not into
a growth phase,
but actually prepare
us for fight or flight
and actually to save
our lives and what
fear we are perceiving.
In addition, fear
also causes chemicals
that interfere with
our immune system
to be released into the
blood, and then this
shuts down the immune
system and actually leads
to illness when we are living
in what is called chronic fear.
The consequence of
this is very important,
because it really
represents this.
The function of our
mind is to create
coherence between our
beliefs and our reality.
In other words, if
you believe there
is something to be afraid
of, then the mind's job
is to create a behavior
that will actually
make a correlation or coherence
between that belief of fear
and the reality that
we're experiencing.
When you are experiencing
love, well, then the function
of the mind is to
manifest the chemistry
to control our behavior so that
we can experience that love.
Point is simple.
Whatever programs we possess
about our perceptions
of the planet, the
function of the mind
is to create behavior
that makes our life
coherent with our beliefs.
This is actually not
a new idea at all.
It's 2,500 years old.
The Buddha actually said,
"What we think, we become."
Well, this is actually
what's going on
as our thought processes adjust
the chemistry of our biology,
which in turn
adjust our behavior,
and then, in result,
whatever our thoughts are,
we will become
that in the world.
I've been talking about
this for many years,
actually, since 1985.
And conventional
science has really
resisted everything
I've said about that.
But then again, in 1990s,
the new idea of epigenetics
came in, and also, in
the current time now,
science is also
beginning to recognize
how our consciousness
is creating
the character of our lives.
Now, to give you a quote
from Steve Cole, researcher
at the University of California
Los Angeles Medical School,
this is what he said in a paper,
and it's profoundly important.
"To an extent that immunologists
and psychologists rarely
appreciate, we are architects
of our own experience."
He goes on to say, "Your
subjective experience carries
more power than your
objective situation."
Well, that last sentence
is a little bit complex,
because I can change it and make
it much more profoundly simple
in this regard.
Let's rewrite it
as the following.
"Your belief carries more
power than your reality."
And this is the profound,
important understanding
of how our belief is actually
creating our life experiences.
Well, it's all
influenced by the mind.
And when we say the
mind, a lot of people
think, well, that's a
single thing, the mind.
But this is actually
incorrect, because the mind
is comprised of two subunits,
the conscious and subconscious
minds.
These are two
different entities.
Most importantly, the conscious
and subconscious minds
have different functions.
And very importantly, the
conscious and subconscious
minds learn in different ways.
The function of
the conscious mind?
Well, that's the latest
evolution of the brain.
It's actually a lobe
of neural tissue
right behind your forehead.
It's called the
prefrontal cortex.
This is the seat of your
personal identity, your source,
or your spirituality.
The character of the
conscious mind is creativity.
So I say, well, then, what is
the role of the conscious mind?
It's to manifest our wishes,
our desires, our aspirations.
And the conscious
mind is the seat
of positive thinking, which
profoundly changes our lives.
A lot of people say, "Come
on, that positive thinking
can't be real."
But guess what?
The understanding of
the placebo effect
goes back nearly 100 years.
What is the placebo effect?
It's a positive belief
about a medical drug
or a medical therapy
where someone
thinks that the drug or
therapy is going to heal them.
They believe it's
going to heal them.
They take the magic pill,
get better, and then
find out that the pill
was just a sugar pill.
So all of a sudden,
you have to ask them,
what made them better?
Well, obviously, it
wasn't the sugar pill.
It was the belief
in the sugar pill
that is responsible
for the placebo
effect, a positive belief.
This is very, very
important, because it really
emphasizes the nature of how
our thoughts are manifesting
our life experiences.
What most people don't
understand is this.
Negative thoughts
are equally powerful
but work in the
opposite direction.
In medicine, the term
for negative thoughts
is the nocebo effect.
Interesting point--
a negative thought
can cause any illness
on this planet.
It can even cause
a person to die.
So it's the power of thought
that actually is controlling
the character of our lives.
The conscious mind-- creative,
wishes, desires, aspirations.
That's what we're looking for.
In contrast, the
subconscious mind,
which represents about
90% of the brain,
is the equivalent of a
record-playback mechanism.
It records behaviors, and then,
when we need that behavior,
it's just like pushing a button.
It will automatically play.
Well, this is really important,
because the subconscious'
programs actually facilitate
the character of our lives.
Give you a simple example.
When did you learn how to walk?
Before you were
two years of age.
Did you ever have to
relearn how to walk?
Well, fortunately, no, for
the simple reason is this.
Once the programming
of walking is installed
in the subconscious
mind as a program,
you don't even have to
say, "I'm going to walk."
You just have the
intention of moving.
The brain will automatically
engage the walking program
and carry it out for
you automatically.
So subconscious mind
is really pretty cool,
because what it does is
it saves us a lot of time
from relearning things
over and over again.
I mean, if we didn't have a
subconscious mind, every day,
when you wake up,
guess what you'd
have to first learn how to do?
Walk.
And of course, we'd never
get anywhere that way.
It's very efficient
and very convenient.
But there is one
problem with that.
What if some of the programs
in the subconscious mind
are negative?
Then we go, well, there is a
problem, because that means,
automatically, when
stimulated, these programs
are not going to take us
in a positive direction.
They will actually undermine
the character of our lives.
So the subconscious is a
record-playback device.
It's habitual.
That's its main thing, as
compared to creativity,
which is the function
of the conscious mind.
So the habits of the
subconscious mind,
where do they come from?
Well, some of the
habits are genetic,
because those are
called instincts.
If something flies
towards your face,
you will automatically
blink your eye.
It's not learned.
It's a built-in instinct.
And more importantly-- and
we're going to emphasize this--
is that many of the programs
in the subconscious mind,
we actually didn't
personally experience.
Many of the programs
were actually
acquired by observing
other people
and downloading their behavior.
They were actually created by
observing our mother, father,
our family, and our community.
These are acquired behaviors.
So why should we have programs?
Well, I'll give you
a simple example.
If you buy a
brand-new computer, it
will have an operating system.
I say, great.
Let's activate the computer.
Yep, you can activate it.
The operating system will kick
it in, get it ready to go.
Then I say, OK, let's
do something with it.
How about writing?
Oh, how about making a drawing?
I say, wait.
What do you need?
You need programs to
carry out these functions.
Interestingly, as a
child is developing,
it has already a built-in
system to operate.
But it doesn't
have any programs.
It has to acquire programs in
order for it to be functional.
So I go, oh, so we
download programs,
and then we can use these
programs to carry out
our lives.
Well, here's an
interesting story
about the downloading
of programs,
that during the last
trimester of pregnancy
and the first seven
years of life,
our brain is not operating at
the level of consciousness.
That's a higher
functional vibration.
Vibration-- oh, you
can read that when
you put wires on your head.
It's called an
electroencephalograph.
There are all different
levels of vibration.
The lowest vibration
is called delta.
That's the vibration
of the brain when
it's sleeping or unconscious.
The next higher level of
vibration is called theta.
Theta is characterized
as imagination.
Then the next higher
vibration is actually
the beginning of consciousness.
That vibration is called alpha.
It's actually calm
consciousness.
And lastly, there's
still a higher vibration
that we normally use
during our work experiences
or during our education.
And that higher
vibration is called beta.
That's like focused
schoolroom consciousness.
Well, we don't start out
with all these vibrations.
As a child, we begin
with the lowest vibration
when we're born, which is delta,
because a child spends most
of its first year sleeping.
So its brain is not
really functioning
at that higher level.
But after the first
year, the child's brain
starts to ramp up to the
next vibration, called theta.
So as a child's
brain's developing,
it's actually got an
operating system in it.
But there are no programs.
And the question is, when
does actual programming start?
Well, here's a very
interesting fact.
Programming starts even
before the child is born.
I say, well, how can a
child that's still in utero
be programmed?
And the answer is related to
something called the placenta.
And the placenta
is the interface
between the mother's blood
and the fetus' blood,
because the mother's blood is
what contains the nutrition
that, when it crosses
into the placenta,
will nourish the
developing fetus.
Well, as I mentioned, blood
has more than just nutrition.
In the last trimester
of pregnancy,
the information in
the mother's blood
is transferred along
with the nutrition.
If the mother's in love,
wonderful information
such as dopamine,
growth hormone,
this stuff is going
into the fetus as well.
However, if the
mother is experiencing
problems in her world--
she's not supported,
there's a lack of love--
well, the fetus
may not understand
the reasons of what's going on.
The fetus does read the
information, the hormones that
go in, stress hormones versus
love hormones, for example.
And I say, then what's relevant?
The child in utero in the
last trimester of pregnancy
is learning from pattern.
If the mother is in fear, or if
the mother is in stress, well,
those chemicals also go
into the body of the fetus
and adjust the genetics
via epigenetics.
So the mother's
experience is actually
adjusting the genetics
of her own fetus
through epigenetic mechanisms.
So a fetus is getting what is
called a head start program.
This is a very important point
in development for this reason.
When a mother is
born, she already
has the eggs for
all her generations
that she can create.
I go, yeah, but she won't have
a baby for, let's say, 20 years.
And I say, relevant?
Well, the whole
world's situation
can change in 20 years.
So when it's time
to have a baby,
the egg isn't really
programmed to respond
to the outside environment.
This is very important,
because the baby's biology
is going to
encourage it or allow
it to survive in
whatever environment,
a peaceful environment or
a war-torn environment.
Well, that happens before
the baby's even born.
It's already being programmed.
For example, if the father
is talking to the fetus
as it's developing,
and the baby is born,
and the father says
something, the baby
will immediately
identify the father
who talked to it through
the abdominal wall.
However, once the
baby is born, now it's
dealing with the outside
environment directly.
In the first year or
so of the baby's life,
it's not really responding
to the environment
that much, mainly because,
most of that time,
the baby is sleeping
in the first year.
But by the beginning
of the second year,
the baby is now very
responsive to what's
going on in the environment,
but it's in a state
called theta, a lower
vibration than consciousness.
The characteristic of
theta is imagination.
Well, this is exactly
what children under seven
are really good at.
They can have a tea party,
pour nothing into a cup,
drink nothing, and talk about
how wonderful the tea was.
Or a child could ride a
broom, thinking it's a horse.
Well, actually, it's riding
a broom in the child's mind.
Imagination via theta is
actually turning that broom
into a real horse.
The mother says,
"Give me the broom."
The child is like, "What
are you talking about?"
Because at that moment,
it's no longer a broom.
In the imagination
of that child,
it is now actually a horse.
So theta is the
first experiences
of the child responding to
the external environment.
After age seven, the child
ramps up its brain activity
to the next higher
level, called alpha.
And alpha is calm consciousness.
So now, the child becomes
conscious of the world
around it.
And by age 12,
the brain activity
ramps up again to the
next higher level,
called beta, which is schoolroom
focused consciousness.
This is why there are different
educational paradigms after age
12, because a child is
more capable of dealing
with higher consciousness.
Well, we can look at this chart
of the evolution of the states
of the brain from delta,
theta, alpha, and beta,
and, well, we recognize
a very important fact.
The first seven years
of a child's life,
it's not expressing
consciousness.
Theta is below consciousness.
And I say, well, there's another
very important characteristic
of theta.
And that is theta as
a state of hypnosis.
And I say, what's the relevance?
How many rules do you
think a child must
learn to become a
functional member
of a family in a community?
Thousands of rules of behavior.
I mean, just to give you an
idea, think about it this way.
When a father talks to his own
child, he talks in one way.
When a father talks
to a neighbor's child,
he talks in a different way.
And how he talks
to the mother is
totally different than how he
speaks with a neighbor, which
is then totally different
than the father would
talk with a policeman.
And all of a sudden,
you start to see
that each situation in the
world requires somewhat
of a different behavior.
How is a child supposed
to learn thousands
of different codes of behavior?
And the answer is
profoundly simple,
because nature has created the
first seven years of that child
to be in a state
of theta hypnosis.
All the child has to do is
observe the mother, the father,
the family, the community.
And what's the child
doing during theta?
Downloading hypnotically
the behaviors.
And the significance
about this, then,
is the primal programs that go
into a child's nervous system
are not coming from the wishes
and desires of the child.
They're actually directly
downloaded from observing
the family and the community--
very significant, because those
behaviors may not necessarily
support the wishes and desires
of that child when it grows up.
There's another factor
in this time period
that's very critical.
And that is the experience of
what is called self-identity.
A child may ask, "Who am I?"
The answer, actually, is
not coming from the child.
It's coming from the
parents and the community
and the teachers, who actually
tell the child, "Oh, you're
the smartest, most loving,
beautiful child that's
ever been on this planet."
Of course, that will be
downloaded and become
part of self-identity.
However, that's a
very rare input.
Most children are
criticized by their parents.
You say, "Criticized?
For what?"
Well, think about it this way.
If there's a player on a team,
and player isn't performing
well, the coach doesn't
come up and go, "Oh, it
would be so nice of
you to do better."
No, the coach comes
up and says, "Come on,
you can do better than that.
That's not good enough.
Who do you think you are?
You don't deserve
to be on this team."
Well, the coach is
saying that to do what?
To actually needle the player
into going, "OK, coach, I'll
do better," because an older
child with consciousness
can understand exactly why
the coach is saying that.
But then I go, well, what
if parents act as coaches?
And I go, well,
here's the problem.
If the child is under seven,
the child's not conscious.
It's not understanding
the meaning of everything.
It's in a state of record.
It's in a state of theta.
It's just downloading the words.
So parents are trying
to act like a coach
to improve the character or
the behavior of their children.
A child is taking
all those words
exactly as they were
spoken and downloading them
into the subconscious mind.
Our subconscious
minds are loaded
with critical assessments
of ourselves, so much so
that we actually have a very
difficult time in loving
ourselves.
I say, why?
Because our
subconscious programs
can tell you every reason why
you should criticize yourself--
not good enough, not smart
enough, not loving enough,
blah, blah, blah,
over and over again.
And I go, oh my God, our
subconscious programs
are so self-critical
that, in our mind,
we will use those and
criticize ourselves.
This is very disempowering,
because then, all of a sudden,
we are not really loving
ourselves anymore.
We're super critical
of ourselves.
And this, unfortunately,
leads to some very bad
behavioral consequences.
So first seven years
of a child's life,
download programs,
no consciousness
involved, but necessary
for enculturation
and self-identity.
But then, after a
seven, consciousness
kicks in, alpha consciousness,
creative consciousness.
This is actually a really
wonderful part of our lives,
where we start to behave
and become very creative
with our consciousness and then
even evolve into the higher
level from theta
to beta and have
much more complex
understandings of who we are
and how we fit into
the world around us.
Well, now, there's a problem.
And this problem is so profound.
It affects all of us.
And the problem is simply this.
Conscious mind
can drive our body
like a-- consider
a body a vehicle,
and the conscious mind's
got its hands on the wheel.
So when the conscious mind
is driving the vehicle,
we're moving towards
the destinations
that we want in our life.
Conscious mind can also think.
I go, so?
I say, thinking is
an internal job.
In other words, wherever a
thought is, it's on the inside.
It's not on the outside.
If I ask you a simple
question right now--
tell me what you're
doing on Sunday--
I say, where are
you going to get
the answer for that question?
You're going to go inside.
I say, wait a minute.
If the conscious mind is going
inside to seek an answer, then,
by definition, it is no
longer driving the vehicle,
because it's not
paying attention.
I go, oh my gosh, then
every time we're in thought,
the conscious mind
lets go of the wheel,
and the conscious
mind goes inside.
Well, science has revealed
that the average person is in
thought 95% of the day.
If our conscious mind is
in thought 95% of the day
and not paying attention, then
what's controlling our biology?
That becomes the job
of the subconscious
mind, 'cause the subconscious
mind is autopilot.
And what's the problem?
The subconscious mind is
not going to drive you
toward wishes and desires.
The subconscious mind's
got programs in it
that you downloaded
from other people.
A very interesting fact--
science has recognized up
to 70% of the downloaded
programs in our subconscious
mind--
guess what-- are negative
and disempowering programs.
What's the point?
We're only operating our
life 5% of the time seeking
wishes and desires.
95% of our life is actually
coming from the programs
in the subconscious,
because we're in thought.
And most of those programs are
negative and disempowering.
And I say, then,
what's the consequence?
You are not leading the
life you wish and desire.
You're leading the
life of a program
that you got in the
first seven years.
And then, recognizing
that most of these
are negative and
disempowering, then we
start to see that our
life becomes a struggle.
And yet, we don't actually
see that we're involved.
All we see is the result of
our subconscious mind taking
control, because our life is
not working out the way we want.
Reason?
Because the programs from the
subconscious aren't yours.
They came from other people
with their own problems.
And all of a sudden, we have
a very important insight here.
And the insight is this.
Are you creating the
life that you want?
Are you creating the life
you've been programmed with?
In fact, the idea of this
programming is not new.
For 400 years, the Jesuits
have had a very famous saying.
"Give me a child for
the first seven years,
and I'll give you the
man," St. Francis Xavier.
The Jesuits already
knew, whatever program
went in the first
seven years, when
you're in a state of
theta, 95% of your life
is going to come
from that program.
So if you can control the first
seven years of a child's life,
you ultimately control the
rest of that child's life,
because 95% of
that life is going
to come from the programs
downloaded during that period.
This is profoundly
important for this reason.
We wake up in the morning.
We have wishes and desires.
Oh, today, I'm
going to be healthy.
Today, I'm going to
find a relationship.
Oh, today, I'm going to get
that job I always wanted.
And then we go out
into the world.
And then we struggle, and then
we come home at night, beaten.
So they look at
themselves as victims.
I'm a victim of the world.
Why?
I wanted this.
I got that.
And so it's not me that
caused the problem.
I'm the one with
the good wishes.
Well, there's a story
that I've relayed
to audiences for 30 years.
Perhaps, in your history,
you had a friend,
and you were very
close to your friend,
and you knew your friend's
behavior very well.
And you also knew
your friend's parent.
And one day, you see your friend
expressing the same behavior
as their parent.
So, you know, it excites you.
You want to tell your friend.
You go, "Hey, Bill, you're
just like your dad."
Back away from Bill.
Bill's going to go ballistic.
"How can you compare
me to my dad?
I'm nothing like my dad."
Most people laugh when they
hear this, because they've
had that experience.
And I'm going to
tell you, this is
one of the most profound,
important stories I
can tell you, for what reason?
Everybody else can see that
Bill behaves like his dad.
The only one who
doesn't see it is Bill.
I say, but why
can't Bill see it?
And the answer is this.
Where's his observing conscious
mind during this time?
It's inside thinking.
So Bill does not even see the
behavior that is coming out.
And the problem is, hey,
if 70% of those programs
are disempowering
and self-sabotaging,
and you can't see the behavior,
what is the consequence?
And the relevance is
really, really critical,
because all of us are Bill.
It's just the
natural way of life.
So what does this information
mean for us as adults?
Well, with the new
insights on childhood
developmental
programming, we are then
enabled to move from our
perception of being victims
to that of becoming masters
in programming the character
of our lives.
And by reprogramming
a subconscious mind,
we can manifest a
heaven-on-earth experience.
Thank you for joining me.
I'm your host, Bruce Lipton, for
this series on inner evolution
through biological change.
Join me for the
next episode, where
we talk about heaven
on earth and taking
the proverbial red pill.